---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /publications/
author_profile: true
---

# **Projects**

## **BCMedTech: Multiscale Modeling and Intervention for Improving Long-Term Medication Adherence in Context**

There are nearly 4 million breast cancer survivors in the USA. Adherence to long- term endocrine therapy is crucial for survivors of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer prescribed these daily medications to prevent cancer recurrence. Despite the life-saving benefits of these medications, rates of adherence are low. Medication-taking behavior is simultaneously influenced by multiscale factors, in- cluding personal and environmental factors, and a patient’s other behavioral patterns. Despite advances in smart and connected health, there have been few attempts to develop and deliver personalized inter- ventions for medication adherence. Existing technology-based interventions focus on cognitive reasons for non-adherence to medications experienced by some people (e.g., forgetting), but fail to account for inter- actions between cognitive factors and other types of factors (i.e., environmental, behavioral) that contribute to adherence. Furthermore, few technology-driven interventions have been assessed for efficacy in sup- porting medication adherence. Tools to understand interactions between multiscale factors and the effect that personalized interventions have on these factors would ultimately improve medication adherence. This 3-phase project will overcome these fundamental scientific barriers by developing and employing a Mul- tiscale Modeling and Intervention (MMI) system. First, a system consisting of sensor-rich smartphones, wireless medication event monitoring systems (MEMS), wireless beacons, and wearable sensors that col- lect in situ data on medication adherence, will be developed to provide continuous, non-invasive adherence assessment and multiscale monitoring of factors. Second, the MMI system will be deployed to breast cancer survivors to model relationships between medication adherence and the multiscale factors, identify patterns of factors associated with medication-taking behavior, and develop intervention modules. Third, a proof-of-concept for MMI will be demonstrated through a human subjects pilot study, with subjects receiv- ing multiscale interventions.  


## **CommSense: A Wearable Sensing Computational Framework for Evaluating Patient-Clinician Interactions**

Quality patient-provider communication is critical to improve clinical care and patient outcomes. While progress has been made with communication skills training for clinicians, significant gaps exist in how to best monitor, measure, and evaluate the implementation of communication skills in the actual clinical setting. Advancements in ubiquitous technology and natural language processing make it possible to realize more objective, real-time assessment of clinical interactions and in turn provide more timely feedback to clinicians about their communication effectiveness. In this paper, we propose CommSense, a computational sensing framework that combines smartwatch audio and transcripts with natural language processing methods to measure selected “best-practice” communication metrics captured by wearable devices in the context of palliative care interactions, including understanding, empathy, presence, emotion, and clarity. We conducted a pilot study involving N=40 clinician participants, to test the technical feasibility and acceptability of CommSense in a simulated clinical setting. Our findings demonstrate that CommSense effectively captures most communication metrics and is well-received by both practicing clinicians and student trainees. Our study also highlights the potential for digital technology to enhance communication skills training for healthcare providers and students, ultimately resulting in more equitable delivery of healthcare and accessible, lower cost tools for training with the potential to improve patient outcomes.  


## **Real-time Monitoring and Modeling of Symptoms and Adverse Events in Lung Cancer Patients Receiving Oral Targeted Therapies for Tumors with EGFR mutations or ALK Rearrangements**

With the expanding use of new targeted therapies to treat lung cancers with actionable mutations, management of adverse events (AEs) has become more complex. Unrecognized AEs can lead to severe symptoms and drug discontinuation, which could affect quality of life or other outcomes. Real time and accurate symptom monitoring may allow for earlier interventions to reduce severity of symptoms, improve quality of life, and avoid drug discontinuations or dose reductions. This project proposes to address the gap by providing a technology-enabled mechanism to both aid patients in self-reporting of symptoms and clinicians in optimizing therapeutics for patients with molecularly-driven lung cancers on oral targeted therapies. We will gather data to test the eﬃcacy of a mobile health system for remote monitoring of patients receiving oral therapy and estimate the real-world frequency of adverse events. We hypothesize that improved side effect monitoring will reduce the severity of AEs, promote long-term treatment adherence, and improve patient reported quality of life (QoL) measures. This proposal will focus on EGFR and ALK given their prevalence in clinic. Future mutation types could be incorporated in the future.  

